README.md, before:

# AI-Augmented Cloud Monitoring Stack

*Prometheus · Grafana · Splunk MLTK · Terraform · Slack Alerting*

## Key Results

| Metric | Before | After |
|--------|--------|-------|
| Mean Time to Detection (MTTD) | 25 minutes (manual log review) | **5 minutes (automated)** |
| CPU Spike Detection | Manual CloudWatch check | **Slack alert in real time** |
| Error Rate Monitoring | Manual log grep | **Grafana panel + auto-alert** |
| Anomaly Detection | None | **Splunk MLTK ML model** |
| Infrastructure Provisioning | Manual console clicks | **Terraform — 3 servers in 3 minutes** |
| Log Ingestion | None | **Splunk — flask + audit logs** |

---

## Architecture

<img width="1536" height="1004" alt="Design" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/60e92b5c-28f7-431f-beab-a643d4437d06" />

### Infrastructure Overview

| Server | Type | Role | Private IP |
|--------|------|------|------------|
| Monitoring Server | t3.small | Prometheus + Grafana + Node Exporter | 10.0.1.106 |
| Splunk Server | t3.medium | Splunk Enterprise + MLTK | 10.0.1.61 |
| App Server | t3.micro | Flask App + Node Exporter + Splunk Forwarder | 10.0.1.181 |

All servers deployed inside a custom VPC with:
- Public subnet in us-east-1a
- Internet Gateway for external access
- Least-privilege security groups per server role
- SSH restricted to engineer IP only (`/32`)

---

## Tech Stack

| Category | Tool | Purpose |
|----------|------|---------|
| Cloud | AWS EC2, VPC, Security Groups | Infrastructure hosting |
| IaC | Terraform | Provision all infrastructure as code |
| Metrics | Prometheus v2.48 | Scrape and store time-series metrics |
| OS Metrics | Node Exporter v1.7 | CPU, memory, disk, network per host |
| Visualisation | Grafana v12 | Dashboards, alerting rules |
| Alerting | Grafana → Slack Webhook | Real-time incident notifications |
| Log Analysis | Splunk Enterprise Free | Log ingestion, search, dashboards |
| AI/ML | Splunk MLTK | Anomaly detection on log patterns |
| Log Shipping | Splunk Universal Forwarder | Forward logs from app server to Splunk |
| Application | Python Flask | Sample app generating real metrics/logs |

---

## Screenshots

### Grafana Dashboard — Live Application Metrics
> CPU usage gauge, P95 latency, error rate, and request rate — all pulling from Prometheus in real time

(<<img width="1899" height="860" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 033635" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3385808d-e85d-4906-b592-4b6381bb8e2e" />>)

---

### Slack Alert — CPU Spike Detected and Auto-Resolved
> Grafana detected CPU spike to 50.3%, fired alert to Slack at 5:12 AM, auto-resolved at 5:17 AM

(<img width="556" height="482" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 063726" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d51cfc66-ce09-45fa-8226-de7f1dfb5d9c" />)

---

### Prometheus Targets — All Scrapers UP
> Prometheus successfully scraping all 4 targets: itself, monitoring node, app node, Flask app

(<img width="937" height="803" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 072053" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/76cc1877-b0d4-4b2d-a29e-01b551f85e83" />)

---

### Splunk — Flask Application Logs Ingested
> Splunk receiving real-time logs from the Flask app via Universal Forwarder over private VPC IP

(<img width="2160" height="719" alt="Security   Application Overview" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7011a874-b2e4-4ab0-b528-a7d206c9453c" />)

---

## Deploy it yourself

### Prerequisites

- AWS account with CLI configured (`aws configure`)
- Terraform >= 1.0 installed
- SSH key pair created in AWS EC2
- Git installed

### Step 1 — Clone the Repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/ai-monitoring-stack
cd ai-monitoring-stack
```

### Step 2 — Configure Variables

```bash
cd terraform
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

Edit `terraform.tfvars`:

```hcl
your_ip       = "YOUR_PUBLIC_IP/32"   # get with: curl ifconfig.me
key_pair_name = "your-key-pair-name"
```

### Step 3 — Deploy Infrastructure

```bash
terraform init
terraform plan    # review what will be created
terraform apply   # type 'yes' to confirm
```

Terraform creates:
- 1 VPC with public subnet and internet gateway
- 3 security groups (monitoring, splunk, app)
- 3 EC2 instances

### Step 4 — Note your output IPs

```
monitoring_public_ip = "x.x.x.x"
splunk_public_ip     = "x.x.x.x"
app_public_ip        = "x.x.x.x"
app_private_ip       = "10.0.1.x"
```

### Step 5 — Set up App Server

```bash
ssh -i your-key.pem ec2-user@APP_PUBLIC_IP
sudo dnf install python3-pip nano wget -y
pip3 install flask prometheus_client
nano app.py   # paste app.py content
sudo systemctl start flask-app
sudo systemctl start node_exporter
```

### Step 6 — Set up Monitoring Server

```bash
ssh -i your-key.pem ec2-user@MONITORING_PUBLIC_IP
# Install Prometheus, Node Exporter, Grafana
# Configure prometheus.yml with app private IP
# Connect Grafana to Prometheus data source
```

### Step 7 — Access Your Stack

| Service | URL |
|---------|-----|
| Prometheus | `http://MONITORING_IP:9090` |
| Grafana | `http://MONITORING_IP:3000` |
| Splunk | `http://SPLUNK_IP:8000` |
| Flask App | `http://APP_IP:5000` |

---

## Security Design Decisions

### Network Security
- **SSH restricted to `/32`** — only the engineer's exact IP can SSH. No `0.0.0.0/0` SSH rules anywhere.
- **Least-privilege security groups** — each server has its own SG allowing only the ports it needs
- **Internal VPC traffic only** — Prometheus scrapes app server via private IP `10.0.1.x`, not public IP. Splunk forwarder sends logs via private IP. No unnecessary internet exposure.
- **Node Exporter port 9100** — only accessible from within the VPC CIDR `10.0.0.0/16`, not from the internet

### Credentials
- No hardcoded credentials anywhere in the codebase
- `terraform.tfvars` excluded from git via `.gitignore`
- `.pem` key files excluded from git
- AWS credentials managed via `aws configure`, not embedded in code

### Why this matters
This demonstrates zero-trust thinking applied to monitoring infrastructure — the same principles I apply to production client environments.

---

## AI/ML Anomaly Detection

The Splunk Machine Learning Toolkit (MLTK) adds genuine AI capability to this stack:

**How it works:**
1. Splunk Universal Forwarder ships Flask app logs to Splunk over port 9997 (private IP)
2. MLTK trains a `DensityFunction` model on request volume patterns
3. The model establishes a baseline of "normal" traffic
4. Any request pattern outside the 95th percentile is flagged as an anomaly
5. Anomaly alerts surface in the Splunk Security Dashboard

**What it catches:**
- Unusual spikes in error rates
- Traffic volume anomalies (potential DDoS or app failure)
- Off-hours activity patterns
- System audit events (BPF program loads/unloads)

This is the same approach used in production AIOps environments — applying ML to reduce alert fatigue and catch subtle signals that threshold-based alerting misses.

---

## Incident Simulations

### CPU Stress Test
```bash
sudo dnf install stress -y
stress --cpu 2 --timeout 120
```
**Result:** Prometheus detected spike, Grafana fired Slack alert within 3 minutes

### High Error Rate
```bash
for i in {1..50}; do curl -s http://localhost:5000/api/data > /dev/null; done
```
**Result:** Flask app's 10% random error rate triggered Grafana Error Rate alert

### Instance Down
```bash
sudo systemctl stop flask-app
# Prometheus fires InstanceDown alert within 1 minute
sudo systemctl start flask-app
```
**Result:** Alert fired in Prometheus, auto-resolved on recovery

### Failed Auth Events
```bash
ssh wronguser@APP_PUBLIC_IP  # intentional failure
```
**Result:** Linux audit log captured event, Splunk ingested and displayed in security dashboard

---

## Cost Analysis

| Resource | Type | Running Cost | Stopped Cost |
|----------|------|-------------|--------------|
| Monitoring Server | t3.small | ~$15/month | ~$0 |
| Splunk Server | t3.medium | ~$30/month | ~$0 |
| App Server | t3.micro | ~$8/month | ~$0 |
| EBS Storage (90GB total) | gp3 | ~$7/month | ~$7/month |
| Data transfer | Minimal | ~$1/month | ~$0 |
| **Total running** | | **~$61/month** | |
| **Total stopped** | | | **~$7/month** |

**Cost optimisation strategy:** Stop instances when not actively using the stack. All data and configuration persists on EBS volumes. Restart takes under 2 minutes.

```bash
# Stop all instances via AWS CLI
aws ec2 stop-instances --instance-ids i-xxx i-yyy i-zzz

# Start them again
aws ec2 start-instances --instance-ids i-xxx i-yyy i-zzz
```

---

## Project Structure

```
ai-monitoring-stack/
├── terraform/
│   ├── main.tf                 # VPC, subnet, internet gateway, route table
│   ├── ec2.tf                  # 3 EC2 instances with AMI lookup
│   ├── security_groups.tf      # Least-privilege SGs per server role
│   ├── variables.tf            # Input variables with defaults
│   ├── outputs.tf              # Public/private IPs output
│   └── terraform.tfvars        # Your IP and key pair (gitignored)
├── app/
│   └── app.py                  # Flask app with Prometheus metrics
├── prometheus/
│   ├── prometheus.yml          # Scrape config for all targets
│   └── alert_rules.yml         # CPU, memory, down, latency, error alerts
├── grafana/
│   └── dashboards/             # Dashboard JSON exports
├── docs/
│   ├── architecture.svg        # Architecture diagram
│   └── screenshots/            # Project screenshots
└── README.md
```

---

## Future Improvements

- [ ] **HashiCorp Vault** — centralized secrets management, dynamic credentials for PostgreSQL
- [ ] **EKS Cluster Monitoring** — kube-state-metrics, pod-level observability
- [ ] **PagerDuty Integration** — on-call alerting with escalation policies
- [ ] **Terraform Remote State** — S3 backend with DynamoDB locking
- [ ] **AWS GuardDuty** — threat detection integrated with Splunk SIEM
- [ ] **Multi-region DR** — Route 53 failover, RDS Multi-AZ, S3 cross-region replication
- [ ] **Ansible Playbooks** — automate all server configuration (replace manual setup)
- [ ] **GitHub Actions CI/CD** — auto-validate Terraform on PR, run `terraform plan`

---

⭐ **Star this repo if it helped you** ⭐

Commit message:

Enhance README with project description and details
Added project description and details about the AI-augmented monitoring stack, including architecture, key results, and deployment instructions.

README.md, after:

# AI-Augmented Cloud Monitoring Stack

*Prometheus · Grafana · Splunk MLTK · Terraform · Slack Alerting*

## Description

This project deploys a production-grade, AI-augmented monitoring stack entirely as infrastructure as code on AWS. Three EC2 instances are provisioned with Terraform inside a custom VPC — a monitoring server running Prometheus and Grafana, a dedicated Splunk server with the Machine Learning Toolkit, and an application server running a instrumented Flask API.

Prometheus scrapes metrics from all nodes every 15 seconds via Node Exporter and a custom /metrics endpoint on the Flask app. Grafana visualises those metrics across four live dashboard panels — CPU usage, P95 latency, error rate, and request rate — and fires real-time alerts to Slack when thresholds are breached. The stack detected a CPU spike to 50.3% during a stress test and sent a Slack alert within 3 minutes, then automatically resolved it when the load dropped.

On the log analysis side, a Splunk Universal Forwarder ships Flask application logs and Linux audit logs from the app server to Splunk Enterprise over the private VPC network. The Splunk Machine Learning Toolkit runs a DensityFunction anomaly detection model that flags traffic patterns outside the 95th percentile — the same approach used in production AIOps environments to reduce alert fatigue and catch subtle signals that threshold-based alerting misses.

All infrastructure is defined in Terraform with least-privilege security groups, SSH restricted to a single engineer IP, and no credentials stored in source code. The result is a monitoring stack that reduced mean time to detection from 25 minutes of manual log review to 5 minutes of automated alerting.

## Key Results

| Metric | Before | After |
|--------|--------|-------|
| Mean Time to Detection (MTTD) | 25 minutes (manual log review) | **5 minutes (automated)** |
| CPU Spike Detection | Manual CloudWatch check | **Slack alert in real time** |
| Error Rate Monitoring | Manual log grep | **Grafana panel + auto-alert** |
| Anomaly Detection | None | **Splunk MLTK ML model** |
| Infrastructure Provisioning | Manual console clicks | **Terraform — 3 servers in 3 minutes** |
| Log Ingestion | None | **Splunk — flask + audit logs** |

---

## Architecture

img width="1536" height="1004" alt="Design" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/60e92b5c-28f7-431f-beab-a643d4437d06" 

### Infrastructure Overview

| Server | Type | Role | Private IP |
|--------|------|------|------------|
| Monitoring Server | t3.small | Prometheus + Grafana + Node Exporter | 10.0.1.106 |
| Splunk Server | t3.medium | Splunk Enterprise + MLTK | 10.0.1.61 |
| App Server | t3.micro | Flask App + Node Exporter + Splunk Forwarder | 10.0.1.181 |

All servers deployed inside a custom VPC with:
- Public subnet in us-east-1a
- Internet Gateway for external access
- Least-privilege security groups per server role
- SSH restricted to engineer IP only (`/32`)

---

## Tech Stack

| Category | Tool | Purpose |
|----------|------|---------|
| Cloud | AWS EC2, VPC, Security Groups | Infrastructure hosting |
| IaC | Terraform | Provision all infrastructure as code |
| Metrics | Prometheus v2.48 | Scrape and store time-series metrics |
| OS Metrics | Node Exporter v1.7 | CPU, memory, disk, network per host |
| Visualisation | Grafana v12 | Dashboards, alerting rules |
| Alerting | Grafana → Slack Webhook | Real-time incident notifications |
| Log Analysis | Splunk Enterprise Free | Log ingestion, search, dashboards |
| AI/ML | Splunk MLTK | Anomaly detection on log patterns |
| Log Shipping | Splunk Universal Forwarder | Forward logs from app server to Splunk |
| Application | Python Flask | Sample app generating real metrics/logs |

---

## Screenshots

### Grafana Dashboard — Live Application Metrics
> CPU usage gauge, P95 latency, error rate, and request rate — all pulling from Prometheus in real time

img width="1899" height="860" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 033635" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3385808d-e85d-4906-b592-4b6381bb8e2e" 

---

### Slack Alert — CPU Spike Detected and Auto-Resolved
> Grafana detected CPU spike to 50.3%, fired alert to Slack at 5:12 AM, auto-resolved at 5:17 AM

img width="556" height="482" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 063726" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d51cfc66-ce09-45fa-8226-de7f1dfb5d9c"

---

### Prometheus Targets — All Scrapers UP
> Prometheus successfully scraping all 4 targets: itself, monitoring node, app node, Flask app

<img width="937" height="803" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 072053" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/76cc1877-b0d4-4b2d-a29e-01b551f85e83"

---

### Splunk — Flask Application Logs Ingested
> Splunk receiving real-time logs from the Flask app via Universal Forwarder over private VPC IP

img width="2160" height="719" alt="Security   Application Overview" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7011a874-b2e4-4ab0-b528-a7d206c9453c"

---

## Deploy it yourself

### Prerequisites

- AWS account with CLI configured (`aws configure`)
- Terraform >= 1.0 installed
- SSH key pair created in AWS EC2
- Git installed

### Step 1 — Clone the Repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/ai-monitoring-stack
cd ai-monitoring-stack
```

### Step 2 — Configure Variables

```bash
cd terraform
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

Edit `terraform.tfvars`:

```hcl
your_ip       = "YOUR_PUBLIC_IP/32"   # get with: curl ifconfig.me
key_pair_name = "your-key-pair-name"
```

### Step 3 — Deploy Infrastructure

```bash
terraform init
terraform plan    # review what will be created
terraform apply   # type 'yes' to confirm
```

Terraform creates:
- 1 VPC with public subnet and internet gateway
- 3 security groups (monitoring, splunk, app)
- 3 EC2 instances

### Step 4 — Note your output IPs

```
monitoring_public_ip = "x.x.x.x"
splunk_public_ip     = "x.x.x.x"
app_public_ip        = "x.x.x.x"
app_private_ip       = "10.0.1.x"
```

### Step 5 — Set up App Server

```bash
ssh -i your-key.pem ec2-user@APP_PUBLIC_IP
sudo dnf install python3-pip nano wget -y
pip3 install flask prometheus_client
nano app.py   # paste app.py content
sudo systemctl start flask-app
sudo systemctl start node_exporter
```

### Step 6 — Set up Monitoring Server

```bash
ssh -i your-key.pem ec2-user@MONITORING_PUBLIC_IP
# Install Prometheus, Node Exporter, Grafana
# Configure prometheus.yml with app private IP
# Connect Grafana to Prometheus data source
```

### Step 7 — Access Your Stack

| Service | URL |
|---------|-----|
| Prometheus | `http://MONITORING_IP:9090` |
| Grafana | `http://MONITORING_IP:3000` |
| Splunk | `http://SPLUNK_IP:8000` |
| Flask App | `http://APP_IP:5000` |

---

## Security Design Decisions

### Network Security
- **SSH restricted to `/32`** — only the engineer's exact IP can SSH. No `0.0.0.0/0` SSH rules anywhere.
- **Least-privilege security groups** — each server has its own SG allowing only the ports it needs
- **Internal VPC traffic only** — Prometheus scrapes app server via private IP `10.0.1.x`, not public IP. Splunk forwarder sends logs via private IP. No unnecessary internet exposure.
- **Node Exporter port 9100** — only accessible from within the VPC CIDR `10.0.0.0/16`, not from the internet

### Credentials
- No hardcoded credentials anywhere in the codebase
- `terraform.tfvars` excluded from git via `.gitignore`
- `.pem` key files excluded from git
- AWS credentials managed via `aws configure`, not embedded in code

### Why this matters
This demonstrates zero-trust thinking applied to monitoring infrastructure — the same principles I apply to production client environments.

---

## AI/ML Anomaly Detection

The Splunk Machine Learning Toolkit (MLTK) adds genuine AI capability to this stack:

**How it works:**
1. Splunk Universal Forwarder ships Flask app logs to Splunk over port 9997 (private IP)
2. MLTK trains a `DensityFunction` model on request volume patterns
3. The model establishes a baseline of "normal" traffic
4. Any request pattern outside the 95th percentile is flagged as an anomaly
5. Anomaly alerts surface in the Splunk Security Dashboard

**What it catches:**
- Unusual spikes in error rates
- Traffic volume anomalies (potential DDoS or app failure)
- Off-hours activity patterns
- System audit events (BPF program loads/unloads)

This is the same approach used in production AIOps environments — applying ML to reduce alert fatigue and catch subtle signals that threshold-based alerting misses.

---

## Incident Simulations

### CPU Stress Test
```bash
sudo dnf install stress -y
stress --cpu 2 --timeout 120
```
**Result:** Prometheus detected spike, Grafana fired Slack alert within 3 minutes

### High Error Rate
```bash
for i in {1..50}; do curl -s http://localhost:5000/api/data > /dev/null; done
```
**Result:** Flask app's 10% random error rate triggered Grafana Error Rate alert

### Instance Down
```bash
sudo systemctl stop flask-app
# Prometheus fires InstanceDown alert within 1 minute
sudo systemctl start flask-app
```
**Result:** Alert fired in Prometheus, auto-resolved on recovery

### Failed Auth Events
```bash
ssh wronguser@APP_PUBLIC_IP  # intentional failure
```
**Result:** Linux audit log captured event, Splunk ingested and displayed in security dashboard

---

## Cost Analysis

| Resource | Type | Running Cost | Stopped Cost |
|----------|------|-------------|--------------|
| Monitoring Server | t3.small | ~$15/month | ~$0 |
| Splunk Server | t3.medium | ~$30/month | ~$0 |
| App Server | t3.micro | ~$8/month | ~$0 |
| EBS Storage (90GB total) | gp3 | ~$7/month | ~$7/month |
| Data transfer | Minimal | ~$1/month | ~$0 |
| **Total running** | | **~$61/month** | |
| **Total stopped** | | | **~$7/month** |

**Cost optimisation strategy:** Stop instances when not actively using the stack. All data and configuration persists on EBS volumes. Restart takes under 2 minutes.

```bash
# Stop all instances via AWS CLI
aws ec2 stop-instances --instance-ids i-xxx i-yyy i-zzz

# Start them again
aws ec2 start-instances --instance-ids i-xxx i-yyy i-zzz
```

---

## Project Structure

```
ai-monitoring-stack/
├── terraform/
│   ├── main.tf                 # VPC, subnet, internet gateway, route table
│   ├── ec2.tf                  # 3 EC2 instances with AMI lookup
│   ├── security_groups.tf      # Least-privilege SGs per server role
│   ├── variables.tf            # Input variables with defaults
│   ├── outputs.tf              # Public/private IPs output
│   └── terraform.tfvars        # Your IP and key pair (gitignored)
├── app/
│   └── app.py                  # Flask app with Prometheus metrics
├── prometheus/
│   ├── prometheus.yml          # Scrape config for all targets
│   └── alert_rules.yml         # CPU, memory, down, latency, error alerts
├── grafana/
│   └── dashboards/             # Dashboard JSON exports
├── docs/
│   ├── architecture.svg        # Architecture diagram
│   └── screenshots/            # Project screenshots
└── README.md
```

---

## Future Improvements

- [ ] **HashiCorp Vault** — centralized secrets management, dynamic credentials for PostgreSQL
- [ ] **EKS Cluster Monitoring** — kube-state-metrics, pod-level observability
- [ ] **PagerDuty Integration** — on-call alerting with escalation policies
- [ ] **Terraform Remote State** — S3 backend with DynamoDB locking
- [ ] **AWS GuardDuty** — threat detection integrated with Splunk SIEM
- [ ] **Multi-region DR** — Route 53 failover, RDS Multi-AZ, S3 cross-region replication
- [ ] **Ansible Playbooks** — automate all server configuration (replace manual setup)
- [ ] **GitHub Actions CI/CD** — auto-validate Terraform on PR, run `terraform plan`

---

⭐ **Star this repo if it helped you** ⭐
